5 ways data centers endanger their local communities and the country as a whole Search analysis, research, academics… Home Podcasts Arts Business + Economy Culture + Society Education Environment + Energy Health Politics Science + Tech En français Edition Africa Australia Brasil Canada Canada (français) Català España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States Newsletters Skip to content Edition: Canada Africa Australia Brasil Canada (français) Català España Europe France Global Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States s Donate Newsletters Academic rigour, journalistic flair Podcasts Arts Business + Economy Culture + Society Education Environment + Energy Health Politics Science + Tech En français An Amazon data center sits next to a neighborhood in northern Virginia. Nathan Howard/Getty Images 5 ways data centers endanger their local communities and the country as a whole Published: June 8, 2026 8.33am EDT https://theconversation.com/5-ways-data-centers-endanger-their-local-communities-and-the-country-as-a-whole-282348 https://theconversation.com/5-ways-data-centers-endanger-their-local-communities-and-the-country-as-a-whole-282348 Link copied Share article Share article Copy link Email Bluesky Facebook WhatsApp Messenger LinkedIn X (Twitter) Print article Every internet search, streamed video and AI-generated response depends on a data center somewhere. Driven by rapid growth in artificial intelligence, cloud computing and cryptocurrency, data centers have become the backbone of the modern digital economy. But though their key role is in enabling virtual and remote experiences, data centers are physical buildings in real communities around the nation and the globe. The United States hosts more than 4,000 data centers – more than any other country . The U.S. Department of Energy expects that, taken together, all U.S. data centers will consume as much as 12% of all U.S. electricity by 2028 . In 2023, data centers consumed about 4.4% of total U.S. electricity – roughly 176 terawatt-hours. In the U.S., Virginia has more data centers than any other state – over 600, two-thirds of which are in the northern Virginia suburbs of Washington, D.C. In 2023, the state’s data centers consumed about 26% of Virginia’s total electricity supply – a higher share than in any other state. We study science communication , climate science and public health , so we wanted to understand how data centers in Virginia affect the people who live near them and the broader public. We found that the data centers that already exist affect nearby residents and the nation as a whole in five main areas: air quality, water quality, noise levels, land use and energy costs. A row of generators sits alongside a data center building in northern Virginia. Andrew Caballero-Reynolds/AFP via Getty Images Air pollution Data centers generally operate 24/7 and consume enormous amounts of electricity, which must be generated somewhere – either near the data center or farther away. When fossil fuels are burned to generate that power, they emit a wide range of air pollutants , including those linked to lung disease, cardiovascular disease, stroke and neurological conditions. They also emit heat-trapping pollution that causes global warming and climate change, which, in turn, worsens air pollution further. Generating power for U.S. data centers in 2023 emitted the equivalent of 2.2% of the nation’s greenhouse gas emissions. Other air pollutants emitted from fossil-fuel combustion are associated with increased risk of ADHD and autism in children and risks of Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases in older adults. Unless the energy powering data centers comes from clean energy sources, such as solar, wind or geothermal, generating that electricity also pollutes the air. People who live near fossil-fuel burning power plants, whether in communities that also host data centers or in distant states, are exposed to air pollution . And during electrical outages, on-site diesel generators kick in, releasing large amounts of air pollution that can harm data center employees and nearby residents alike. Water consumption and pollution Data centers require vast quantities of water to cool their servers. Globally, they are projected to consume between 4.2 billion and 6.6 billion cubic meters of water annually by 2027. In the United States, data centers already rank among the top 10 industrial water users. In northern Virginia, data center water use has risen sharply. In Loudoun County alone, just northwest of D.C., potable water use by data centers more than doubled between 2019 and 2023 , while facilities across northern Virginia consumed nearly 2 billion gallons of water in 2023 . This demand can strain local rivers, aquifers and municipal water systems , even in regions like the mid-Atlantic that are not usually prone to drought, but especially in regions like the U.S. Southwest that face persistent droughts. Cooling fans on data center roofs can spread noise and vibrations. Andrew Caballero-Reynolds/AFP via Getty Images Noise pollution Data centers’ continuous operation means that cooling systems, including air chillers and cooling fans , generate a persistent humming sound around the clock – as do any generators that are in use to provide power. In northern Virginia, some residents have complained about an industrial-scale “drone” or “hum.” Measurements at the data centers that were the subject of complaints found noise levels were between 40 and 59 decibels on residential property. Those noise levels are quieter than a conversation with someone 3 feet away and not loud enough to damage people’s hearing or violate local noise ordinances. But they are close to levels the EPA says reduce people’s ability to work, sleep and exercise . Some people have complained that data center noise has given them trouble sleeping and concentrating, and some have said they avoid using their homes’ outdoor spaces, where the noise is louder. A data center under construction in Ashburn, Va., in November 2025. Andrew Caballero-Reynolds/AFP via Getty Images Land use and community well-being Data center expansion often targets land near green spaces, agricultural areas or rural communities where developers can secure affordable land with access to existing electricity supplies. Converting green space into industrial facilities can diminish health benefits associated with being in and near natural environments, including opportunities for physical activity and improved mental well-being . In Virginia, residents living near data center construction have reported increased exposure to truck traffic and diesel exhaust , which can contribute to respiratory and cardiovascular health risks, especially in children and older adults. While these effects are typical of large construction projects, they can be amplified when several data centers are clustered together. In places like Prince William County, Virginia, developers have proposed data centers on roughly 2,400 acres of undeveloped land in the Rural Crescent, an area designated by the county’s planners to remain relatively undeveloped . Those data centers could transform open space and rural farmland into industrial zones, disrupting communities with long-standing ties to the land . Data centers use large amounts of electricity. Andrew Caballero-Reynolds/AFP via Getty Images Rising energy costs As data centers increase electricity demand, they put upward pressure on energy prices across the grid. A 2024 Virginia legislative report found that the state’s typical residential electricity bill could rise by $14 to $37 per month by 2040 because of grid strain tied to data center growth – a 9% to 25% increase over current average bills, and a figure that does not factor in potential inflation. These higher costs are paid by all consumers, but they place a greater burden on families that are most economically distressed, who also tend to have more health problems . Lower-income families spend a higher share of their budget on electricity, and when bills rise, the consequences can include reduced access to adequate heating and cooling, increased risks of heat-related illness and cold-related cardiovascular stress , as well as difficult choices between paying for energy and food or healthcare. What can be done Many of these health harms can be mitigated through better planning and design. Increasing the share of renewable energy used to power data centers would help reduce air pollution and associated health harms. Using recycled water in targeted systems that cool individual server rows or racks rather than whole buildings can significantly reduce cooling energy demand, with some studies estimating reductions of up to 29% . On noise, a Leesburg, Virginia, data center reduced low-frequency tonal noise by reengineering its fan mounts. And on energy costs, requiring large-scale data centers to cover more of the grid costs they create could help protect residential customers from higher electricity bills. The world’s digital infrastructure runs through data centers, and that is not changing. We believe that expanding this infrastructure without protecting the health of surrounding communities is an unacceptable option. Climate change Artificial intelligence (AI) Renewable energy Energy Air pollution Water quality Air quality Electricity prices Water pollution Virginia Noise pollution Land use Water use Data centers Human health Energy costs Greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) water consumption Neha Gour , Ed Maibach , Luis Ortiz , George Mason University Authors Neha Gour Ph.D. Candidate in Science Communication, George Mason University Ed Maibach Distinguished University Professor Emeritus of Communication, George Mason University Luis Ortiz Assistant Professor of Atmospheric, Oceanic and Earth Sciences, George Mason University Disclosure statement Edward Maibach currently serves on the Board of Directors of the Global Climate and Health Alliance. He has previously had funding from philanthropic organizations to conduct research and educational programming on the human health relevance of climate change and air pollution. Luis Ortiz receives funding from US NSF, NASA, and NOAA to study the impacts of changing hazards on humans and infrastructure. Neha Gour does not work for, consult, own shares in or receive funding from any company or organisation that would benefit from this article, and has disclosed no relevant affiliations beyond their academic appointment. Partners View all partners DOI https://doi.org/10.64628/AAI.hke7hq75u Want to write? Write an article and join a growing community of more than 229,500 academics and researchers from 5,563 institutions. Register now Editorial Policies Community standards Republishing guidelines Analytics Our feeds Get newsletter Who we are Our charter Our team Our blog Partners and funders Resource for media Contact us &#8203; &#8203; &#8203; &#8203; Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections Copyright © 2010–2026, Academic Journalism Society