6 ways data centres can cut their emissions: A case study | World Economic Forum Emerging Technologies 6 ways data centres can cut their emissions — without compromising the AI boom Jan 16, 2025 Data centre electricity usage is expected to double by 2026. Image: REUTERS/Sigtryggur Ari David Costa Chief Sustainability Officer , NTT DATA This article is part of: World Economic Forum Annual Meeting Data centres and transmission networks are responsible for 1% of energy-related greenhouse gas emissions; its usage is expected to double by 2026. IT service providers have a responsibility to address sustainability challenges while keeping emerging technologies from worsening the climate crisis. Data centres can cut greenhouse gas emissions by switching to renewable energy and cleaner fuel sources. The clock is ticking and the thermometer is rising. The climate crisis demands immediate and decisive action. Real, measurable results are now all that matters – and IT service providers are on the frontlines of this battle. The exponential growth of data and the insatiable need for computing power have shifted the focus to energy-guzzling data centres, which even before the AI boom were leaving an ever larger carbon footprint. Have you read? Why circular water solutions are key to sustainable data centres 4 innovative ways to harness waste data centre energy How data centres can join the circular economy to become greener GenAI and data centres While promising unprecedented innovation, GenAI (Generative AI) models are also resource-hungry. Data centres and data transmission networks are already responsible for 1% of energy-related greenhouse gas emissions. Data centre electricity usage is expected to double by 2026 , and AI is set to generate a 160% increase in demand for data centre power. What’s more, nearly two-thirds of organizations globally plan to invest significantly in GenAI in the next two years, and more than 90% are assessing enterprise-wide opportunities to use GenAI. IT service providers therefore have a dual responsibility: addressing the existing sustainability challenges of their industry while keeping emerging technologies from worsening the climate crisis. GenAI offers significant opportunity for businesses, but also poses sustainability challenges. Image: NTT DATA How data centres can stem the tide: a case study As a major data centre services provider, NTT DATA has identified solutions to make this part of the business as sustainable as possible. The company’s experiences can offer guidance to others seeking to cut down their greenhouse gas emissions in data centres. Here are six ways to ensure the growth in data centres around the world does not come at the cost of the planet: 1. Implement direct-to-chip liquid cooling and immersion cooling: These thermal management techniques dissipate heat from high-performance computing systems. Direct-to-chip liquid cooling involves circulating a coolant directly through microchannels or cold plates attached to the heat-generating components. In contrast, immersion cooling submerges servers or electronic components in a dielectric fluid that absorbs and transfers heat away. 2. Switch to renewable energy and use power more efficiently: Renewable energy sources like solar, wind and hydro power are cleaner. When secured via a power purchase agreement (PPA), these also provide long-term cost stability by shielding data centres from volatile fossil-fuel prices. Investing in additional PPAs, which involve building new power plants, adds more renewable energy to the market. Meanwhile, a lower power usage effectiveness factor (PUE) shows that a higher proportion of a data centre’s energy is dedicated to productive computing tasks, reducing operational costs and the carbon footprint of the cooling infrastructure. Replacing outdated equipment with energy-efficient options is one way of lowering a data centre’s PUE. 3. Use cleaner fuel sources: Generators are crucial for providing power to data centres during contingencies like grid outages. Emissions from these backup systems can be reduced by switching from traditional fuels to cleaner fuel sources, like hydrotreated vegetable oil. 4. Conserve water: Major water consumers in data centres are systems that cool air by evaporating water. Water improves the efficiency of these systems by reducing the electricity needed to run compressors in chillers, thereby also lowering carbon emissions. Evaporative systems should only be installed where water supplies are sufficient and sustainable – and run in hybrid mode where possible, to use less water in winter and less electricity in summer. 5. Beat the heat: The heat generated by IT equipment in data centres has reuse potential, either internally or for external applications like district heating grids. Given the data centre lifecycle of 30–50 years, reusing waste heat can lower greenhouse gas emissions in a neighborhood by getting rid of fossil-fuel use for heating. 6. Focus on recycling and disposal: Responsible hardware recycling cuts e-waste and saves resources. Valuable materials can be reused, reducing the need for raw material extraction; proper disposal keeps dangerous substances from polluting the environment. A hands-on approach NTT DATA, the third-largest data centre provider with over 50 data centres in more than 20 countries and regions, has embarked on a range of initiatives globally to make its data centres more sustainable. For example, it was the first to deploy direct-to-chip liquid cooling and immersion cooling in India, improving the PUE in a client’s area to 1.2-1.25 – a significant improvement on the region’s average PUE. At its Berlin 2 Data Centre, NTT DATA works with an energy supplier and the operator of the Marienpark district to transfer waste heat and provide carbon-free heating and warm water to more than 1,000 buildings, with plans to increase the current thermal power equivalent of 2MW to up to 37MW in the future. The company has also invested in wind and solar power plants in India and contracted various PPAs in Europe, which together will bring 1.7TWh of renewable energy to its data centres by 2026, and it is cutting water use by 30 million liters per year at the Hemel Hempstead 3 Data Centre in the UK through a reverse-osmosis plant. NTT DATA&#x27;s work to reduce the carbon impact of its data centres offers a case study to other providers of any size on how to cut emissions from data centres without compromising the crucial role they play in the global economy today. Loading... Don&#x27;t miss any update on this topic Create a free account and access your personalized content collection with our latest publications and analyses. Sign up for free License and Republishing World Economic Forum articles may be republished in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International Public License, and in accordance with our Terms of Use. The views expressed in this article are those of the author alone and not the World Economic Forum. Stay up to date: Data Science Follow Share: The Big Picture Explore and monitor how Data Science is affecting economies, industries and global issues Forum Stories newsletter Bringing you weekly curated insights and analysis on the global issues that matter. Subscribe today More on Emerging Technologies See all Innovator-founders at Summer Davos reveal the next big thing Pooja Chhabria June 25, 2026 How Asia-Pacific can drive industrial competitiveness through a low carbon, circular economy Why Asia&#x27;s energy crisis makes the case for global collaboration How AI is rewriting the rules of early-stage innovation These are the Top 10 emerging technologies of 2026 The scientific advances ready to change the world: the Top 10 Emerging Technologies 2026 Jun 23, 2026 About us Who we are Our strategy How we work Our leadership and governance Our Impact More from the Forum Centres Meetings Stakeholders Forum stories Press releases Picture gallery Podcasts Videos Engage with us Sign in Partner with us Become a member Sign up for our press releases Subscribe to our newsletters Contact us Quick links Sustainability at the Forum Careers Language editions EN ▪ ES ▪ 中文 ▪ 日本語 Privacy Policy & Terms of Service Sitemap © 2026 World Economic Forum