Desire for Data Centers Creates Carbon Dilemma for Property Investors | MSCI Global Client Support Client Log In Featured Solutions Featured solutions bring together a variety of products to create approaches customized to your needs Rules-based Index Solutions Fixed Income Offerings Private Asset Solutions Real Estate Data and Analytics Sustainability Solutions Climate Solutions Sustainability Regulatory Toolkit​ Wealth Management Solutions Portfolio Management Solutions Risk Management Solutions Looking for a custom solution? Get in touch Featured newsletter MSCI Research Weekly Stay current with our award-winning research. Subscribe Data & Analytics By topic Wealth Management Risk Management Portfolio Management Managed Solutions Real Estate Investing Private Asset Solutions Factor Investing Carbon Markets Climate Insights​ Physical Risk Solutions Sustainability Data​ Sustainability Reporting By asset class Equities Fixed Income Multi-Asset Class Private Assets Real Estate View all data and analytics products Featured product Introducing MSCI IndexAI Insights™ Seamlessly explore MSCI indexes through conversational AI. Get started Indexes Index categories Market Cap Factors Fixed Income Private Assets Sustainability Climate Thematic Custom Index resources Index-Linked ETPs Real-Time Index Data Methodologies All resources View all indexes Featured indexes Daily private asset indexes Nowcasting delivers decision-grade signals between reporting periods. See how it works Research & Insights By asset class Alternatives Currencies Derivatives Equities Fixed Income Multi-Asset Class Private Credit Private Equity Real Estate By theme Climate Private Assets Regulation Risk Sustainability Wealth View all insights Featured research The 2026 MSCI GP Survey How firms are adapting and where opportunities may lie. Read now Discover MSCI Who we are About Us Our Leadership Corporate Responsibility Inclusion and Belonging News and events Events Event Replays Media Room Recognition Innovation Technology and Data MSCI Institute Grow with us Careers Investor Relations Search Search Contact Sales Research & Insights / Blog posts Blog posts Desire for Data Centers Creates Carbon Dilemma for Property Investors Blog post 9 min read Tom Leahy , Federico Darakdjian , Yoon Young Chung November 5, 2025 Key findings Data-center properties under construction globally have an estimated value of USD 550 billion, more than five times the value of assets investors have acquired since 2007, underscoring the market&#x27;s exponential growth. While major operators and owners have set climate targets, data centers remain closely linked to rising carbon footprints. Ireland and the U.S. may face the steepest rise in emissions tied to properties under construction. A shift to data centers in property portfolios creates a dilemma for institutional investors who have committed to sustainability goals and may need to reconcile such commitments with the global digital transformation. Technology companies, real-estate and infrastructure investors are pumping billions of dollars into the construction of data centers to meet soaring demand from AI and cloud computing. Data centers are among the most energy- and carbon-intensive assets in the digital economy and many operators are turning to renewable energy to help lower their emissions. Yet the industry’s rapid expansion still carries a significant carbon footprint, especially when the actual electricity mix in local grids is taken into account. 1 The growing carbon footprint matters for the real-estate industry. Data centers were the number-one target for property investors in 2025 according to the Urban Land Institute/PwC Emerging Trends in Real Estate report. 2 With the continued growth in carbon emissions from data-center assets, investors face a mounting challenge: How to align long-term climate commitments with exposure to a rapidly expanding, energy-intensive asset class that could raise both portfolio-emissions intensity and the cost of meeting decarbonization targets. Major institutional investors such as Brookfield Asset Management, The Goldman Sachs Group Inc., AXA S.A., CBRE Investment Management and Invesco Ltd. — all of whom rank among the top 20 global buyers of real estate — have committed to align their portfolios with global climate goals through science-based or net-zero targets. A sought-after asset class Property investors spent more than USD 36 billion acquiring data centers in 2024 according to MSCI data, just shy of the record USD 39 billion in 2022. Moreover, data-center investment volume since 2020 eclipses the total invested in the period 2007-2019. Blackstone Inc., the world’s largest property investor, has invested more than USD 16 billion in data centers since the start of 2023, more than in any other property sector. Other major buyers of data centers include CPP Investment Board, DigitalBridge Group, Brookfield Infrastructure Partners L.P., La Caisse (formerly CDPQ) and KKR & Co. Inc. From a sustainability perspective, a shift to property portfolios with a larger share of data centers would be a change versus those comprised of traditional real assets — offices, retail, industrial, etc. Using a series of assumptions based on average electricity usage, energy efficiency, grid emissions factors, etc., we estimate that all other things being equal, a 50-MW hyperscale data center would have an annual carbon footprint equivalent of around 100 energy-efficient office buildings, each of approximately 500,000 square feet. 3 Such a difference emphasizes the dual challenge faced by property investors looking to acquire data centers — harnessing the potential for outsize returns as the sector witnesses almost exponential growth, while managing the carbon footprint such assets introduce to their portfolios. Data-center acquisition activity has surged globally since 2020 Data as of September 2025. Source: MSCI The race to build Sales of data centers have climbed, but the majority of capital is targeting the sector through a development route. MSCI data shows that over 47 GW of additional data-center capacity is currently under construction, with an estimated end value (based on current property prices) of more than USD 550 billion. In the first half of 2025 alone, developers broke ground on more than 12 GW of additional capacity. The surge in construction means that global data-center capacity will increase by around 50% when these centers come online. 4 But as data-center capacity expands, so does the pressure on energy systems. The growth in data-center demand has already strained grids in several regions. In Ireland, for instance, data centers accounted for 22% of electricity demand in 2024, up from just 5% in 2015. 5 Globally, data centers account for around 1.5% of all energy consumption, more than the annual use of France. 6 The International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that data-center energy consumption will double from 1.5% of global capacity in 2024 to 3% by 2030, of which 40% will be generated by coal- and gas-fired power stations. 7 As power demand continues to rise, data centers have become a significant and expanding source of carbon emissions. New construction fueling a surge in global data-center capacity Data as of September 2025. Source: MSCI The impact of the construction boom Using assumptions for power usage effectiveness (PUE) and country-level grid emissions factors (GEFs), 8 and drawing on MSCI data, we estimate the new capacity currently under construction could add 0.7% to global carbon emissions, based on 2024 baselines. 9 Among the countries analyzed, Ireland shows the highest projected increase, with data centers under construction potentially adding up to 2.9% to national carbon emissions when they come online. The U.S., the global leader in data-center development, could see additional emissions equivalent to 2.6% of the country’s current annual level. Additional carbon emissions are also notable for Malaysia and the Philippines, where international data-center operators such as GDS Holdings Ltd and Blackstone-owned AirTrunk, hyperscalers (large cloud-service providers) like Amazon Web Services (AWS), and investors such as KKR have significant capacity under construction. Globally, the largest hyperscalers — Meta Platforms Inc., Microsoft Corp., AWS and Alphabet Inc. — account for much of the data-center space currently under construction. The estimated impact of planned data centers on country emissions Estimate of future carbon emissions by data centers under construction as share of total current carbon emissions (tCO2e). Data as of September 2025. Source: Our World in Data, MSCI Moving beyond renewable offsets Major data-center operators, including large U.S. technology firms and real-estate investment trusts (REITs), have set climate goals that include powering their operations with renewable or low-carbon energy. Most pursue these goals through power purchase agreements (PPAs) or renewable-energy certificates (RECs), which allow them to match their electricity consumption with renewable generation, even when facilities remain connected to carbon-intensive grids. While such agreements enable operators to report lower emissions and renewable energy use, data centers must run continuously and often rely on fossil-fuel-based grids when renewable power is unavailable locally or around the clock. For example, a data center may run off the gas-dominated grid in Virginia, while buying renewable credits based off hydropower from Pennsylvania or solar power from Texas — an approach that does not always reduce overall grid emissions. Some technology firms are signing long-term contracts to secure low-carbon power. For instance, Google (Alphabet Inc.) agreed to a USD 3 billion, 20-year PPA with Brookfield for hydroelectric power in Pennsylvania, while Meta signed a similar 20-year deal with Constellation Energy Corp. to source electricity from a nuclear power facility in Illinois. Such agreements highlight an emerging shift toward securing a continuous low-carbon energy supply. Location versus market-based emissions There is a clear contrast between the location-based and market-based GEFs reported by some of the biggest data-center operators, as shown in the chart below. The difference between the two metrics reflects the widespread use of RECs and PPAs to offset location-based emissions. For investors, this distinction helps explain why portfolios can show progress toward net-zero targets even when the underlying assets remain dependent on local electricity systems. More broadly, data-center operators are expanding their strategies beyond renewable offsets. Many are investing in on-site generation, locating facilities near new renewable projects, or adopting blended PPAs that draw from multiple energy sources to achieve 24/7 renewable coverage. The gap between location and market-based GEFs Grid emissions factors by data-center operator. CyrusOne data for 2023; all other operators for 2024. Data as of August 2025. Source: company reports The investor dilemma The data-center industry appears to be moving in a sustainable direction; however, the significant growth in data-center capacity is outstripping the provision of renewable energy. 10 This growth creates a dilemma for institutional capital: Can data centers align with net-zero investment frameworks, or are they at odds with the sustainability ambitions of institutional investors? Increasing exposure to data centers that are not powered by low-carbon energy raises the overall energy demand and carbon intensity of real-estate portfolios. Therefore, achieving alignment with portfolio-level climate targets becomes more complex, requiring greater reliance on renewable procurement, efficiency improvements or offsetting strategies. Moreover, accounting and disclosure standards are moving toward greater transparency and location-based reporting, which may further complicate portfolio-level decarbonization. 11 Ultimately, data-center investments may become a defining test of whether institutional investors can reconcile long-term climate commitments with the realities of digital transformation and whether the net-zero transition can keep pace with technological innovation. Tom Leahy Executive Director, MSCI Research & Development Federico Darakdjian Senior Associate, MSCI Research & Development Yoon Young Chung Vice President, MSCI Research & Development Subscribe today to have insights delivered to your inbox. Subscribe The Office-Market Recovery Is Here, Just Not Everywhere Office markets are showing early signs of recovery, but the rebound won’t be uniform. Success now hinges on identifying assets that meet post-pandemic tenant and investor demand. Read the blog post Powering AI: The Nuclear Option Energy-hungry data centers are the backbone of AI. And as big tech companies look to meet rising demand for AI capabilities, their emissions are ticking up. So, are net zero ambitions at risk? Or can they be saved by a decades-old energy source in a new guise? Listen to the episode Real Capital Analytics Leverage one of the most extensive databases in real estate. Explore now 1 Operators often reduce their reported, market-based Scope 2 emissions through renewable-energy instruments such as power purchase agreements (PPAs) and renewable-energy certificates (RECs). However, location-based Scope 2 emissions — reflecting the carbon intensity of the grid where the electricity is consumed — remain higher in regions that rely on fossil fuels. Market-based Scope 2 emissions account for a company’s purchased electricity adjusted for contractual instruments such as PPAs or RECs, while location-based Scope 2 emissions are calculated using the average grid emission factor where consumption occurs. 2 &quot;Emerging Trends in Real Estate® Global Outlook 2025,&quot; Urban Land Institute and PwC, March 2025. 3 Assuming PUE of 1.3 for the data center; final energy consumption of 120 kWhFE/m² for the office; and GEF of 0.25kg CO₂e/kWh for both. 4 “Energy and AI Observatory,” International Energy Agency, June 2025; MSCI. 5 Central Statistics Office statistical release, June 10, 2025. 6 “Energy and AI,” International Energy Agency, April 2025. 7 “Energy and AI,” International Energy Agency, April 2025. 8 Grid emission factors (GEFs) measure the amount of carbon dioxide (CO₂) emitted per unit of electricity generated in a given country or region, typically expressed in kilograms of CO₂ per kilowatt-hour (kg CO₂/kWh). GEFs vary depending on the mix of energy sources in each grid (e.g., coal, gas, renewables). 9 For our estimate, annual data-center emissions were calculated by multiplying the total amount of electricity consumed by the average carbon intensity of the electricity grid in each country. This converts electricity use (in kWh) into an estimate of Scope 2 greenhouse gas emissions (in tCO₂e), based on how carbon-intensive the local power supply is. The calculation assumes 100% utilization to represent the maximum potential emissions from operational energy use. We applied country-level grid emissions factors from Our World in Data. 10 According to the IEA, despite rapid renewable growth, fossil fuels are expected to meet over 40% of additional electricity demand from data centers through 2030. See: &quot;Energy for AI,&quot; IEA. 11 The GHG Protocol is updating its Scope 2 Guidance to clarify requirements for market-based reporting and strengthen disclosure of location-based emissions so that reported data more accurately reflects grid decarbonization. See: Greenhouse Gas Protocol, Scope 2 Guidance Revision (WRI/WBCSD, 2023–2025). The content of this page is for informational purposes only and is intended for institutional professionals with the analytical resources and tools necessary to interpret any performance information. Nothing herein is intended to recommend any product, tool or service. For all references to laws, rules or regulations, please note that the information is provided “as is” and does not constitute legal advice or any binding interpretation. Any approach to comply with regulatory or policy initiatives should be discussed with your own legal counsel and/or the relevant competent authority, as needed. Follow MSCI Featured Solutions Rules-based Index Solutions Fixed Income Offerings Private Asset Solutions Real Estate Data and Analytics Sustainability Solutions Climate Solutions Sustainability Regulatory Toolkit​ Wealth Management Solutions Portfolio Management Solutions Risk Management Solutions Featured Solutions Data & Analytics Wealth Management Risk Management Portfolio Management Managed Solutions Real Estate Investing Private Asset Solutions Factor Investing Carbon Markets Climate Insights​ Physical Risk Solutions Sustainability Data​ Sustainability Reporting Equities Fixed Income Multi-Asset Class Private Assets Real Estate Data & Analytics Indexes Market Cap Factors Fixed Income Private Assets Sustainability Climate Thematic Custom Index-Linked ETPs Real-Time Index Data Methodologies Index resources Indexes Research & Insights Alternatives Currencies Derivatives Equities Fixed Income Multi-Asset Class Private Credit Private Equity Real Estate Climate Private Assets Regulation Risk Sustainability Wealth Research & Insights Discover MSCI Contact Sales About Us Our Leadership Corporate Responsibility Inclusion and Belonging Events Event Replays Media Room Recognition Technology and Data MSCI Institute Careers Office Locations Investor Relations Discover MSCI Legal & Regulatory Legal and Regulatory Information Terms of use Privacy notice Modern Slavery Statement Use of ISO standards Index regulation Resources for issuers Sustainability and Climate Resources & Disclosures Manage cookies Legal & Regulatory © 2026 MSCI Inc. All rights reserved.