Data Centers: Straining The Grid and Your Wallet &ndash; The State Energy & Environmental Impact Center About the Center About the Center Advisory Council Fellows Program Contact Us AG Work AG Work What is a State AG? AG Actions Database Issues in Focus Insights Blog Projects Reports Op-Eds Articles News & Events Legally Speaking Recharged Podcast Events Press Releases Get Involved Support Student Connections Work With Us Keywords Home Insights Data Centers: Straining The Grid and Your Wallet Blog Data Centers: Straining The Grid and Your Wallet Jessica Bell (Deputy Director & Energy Director) / Jeffrey Hammons (Legal Staff Member) / October 16, 2025 You’ve heard that data centers are coming to your hometown. Or depending on where you live, they may already be there. Data centers are proliferating to power the development and use of AI technology , an industry that is currently experiencing unprecedented growth. While data centers may select sites based on low electricity rates, tax credits, and the availability of space to build, their neighbors often bear the economic burdens once the data center comes to town. A new approach that takes into account communities and consumers is needed to protect households from surging costs. Data centers can use as much electricity as entire towns , and residential electricity bills in areas near them have increased substantially as the regulation around electricity rates struggles to keep pace with large, costly new data centers. For example, wholesale electricity costs have increased as much as 267% over the past five years in areas near data centers, according to a new investigation by Bloomberg . Why are residential customers covering the costs to bring data centers online? An overview from the Harvard Environmental & Energy Law Program explained how data center-related infrastructure costs are often shared amongst other customers of the electric utility because of our current regulatory model. A recent Union of Concerned Scientists report found that utilities assigned $4.3 billion in connection costs for data center projects to customers in 2024 across seven mid-Atlantic states, including Virginia’s “Data Center Alley.” A variety of regulatory approaches to protect customers exist, including information-gathering on how data centers cause different costs and new cost allocation methods to protect residential customers from data center-driven cost increases. In Virginia specifically, a recent Center for Energy & Environmental Analysis report found that the pace of data center development is outpacing electricity supply additions to the grid and thus driving up residential bills. The report also explained how recent federal actions slowing clean energy development results in data centers becoming more reliant on gas-powered electricity generation, which is susceptible to significant price swings caused by the United States’ increasing participation in global gas markets. A University of Michigan Ford School of Public Policy report on data centers highlights that older power plants are being kept online, despite their high costs and inefficiencies, in states including Virginia, Georgia, and Michigan, to meet increased demand for electricity. The report recommends policymakers prioritize the integration of renewable energy sources to serve these new loads because they are insulated from fuel cost fluctuations. The report also recommends imposing efficiency standards on data centers to ensure that their growth does not disproportionately burden the grid. As NRDC notes, requiring data centers to bring their own generation can take costs and risks off consumers and encourages flexibility. Data centers also bring uncertainty to grid planning, as it is unclear if these facilities will be developed to the extent anticipated. For example, companies often shop around for the best “deal” , which could leave would-be neighbors bearing costs of new infrastructure even if the data center ends up being constructed elsewhere. Policymakers need to consider structuring cost allocations for data-center-driven infrastructure investments so that, should data center growth slow or otherwise not materialize, residential ratepayers aren’t left paying for stranded or inefficient grid assets. Data centers also pose new reliability challenges. As described by the North American Electric Reliability Corporation , a recent loss of about 1,500 megawatts worth of data center load occurred when there was an unexpected disconnection due to a transmission line failure. This created a surplus of generation on the grid akin to a large nuclear power plant unexpectedly coming online. Another reliability challenge is that data centers can rapidly increase or decrease their power use, raising concerns about balancing the grid, frequency stability, and voltage stability. Special rules for large electric loads, like data centers, can help protect customers and ensure we are building a resilient grid to meet new demand, as described in a presentation for state utility consumer advocates . Large load tariffs can ensure that projects are treated consistently and support protections for residential customers. For example, RMI’s principles for large load tariff design include special terms to protect customers if data centers do not come online as planned and encourage consideration of energy efficiency, demand response, and grid-enhancing technologies to support the most efficient use of the existing grid and new investments. Ultimately, a strategy to connect and power data centers must consider consumer protection and the need to keep moving towards a healthy, affordable, and reliable grid. Jeffrey Hammons is a legal staff member at the State Impact Center. Subscribe to Legally Speaking Our bi-weekly newsletter provides timely updates on state attorneys general filings, hearings, decisions, and other notable developments on clean energy, climate and environmental matters. Email Address The State Energy & Environmental Impact Center NYU School of Law New York, NY 10012 [email&#160;protected] Press Inquiries | Career Opportunities Disclaimer : The information provided on this website is for general informational purposes only and may not reflect the most current legal developments. Content may be updated, changed, or removed at any time without prior notice. While efforts are made to keep content accurate and up to date, the State Energy & Environmental Impact Center at New York University School of Law does not guarantee the completeness, reliability, or timeliness of the information. Nothing on this website should be construed as legal advice, and no attorney-client relationship is formed by viewing or interacting with this site. For legal advice tailored to your specific circumstances, consult a qualified attorney.